Updated gatsby conversion guide to work with live editing (#2442)
tinacms/tina.io: content/docs/guides/converting-gatsby-to-tina.mdx

After running the command above you'll receive a few prompts

1. When prompted to select a framework select `other`

> 2. Choose `yarn` as your package manager

Reviewer: Could we instead of yarn just put a generic choice option here? 

```suggestion
2. Choose your preferred package manager for this project.
```

Author: I'm not sure if it'll work with other package managers because it uses the resolutions array. 

https://stackoverflow.com/questions/52416312/npm-equivalent-of-yarn-resolutions

  }
```

To fix any bugs related to conflicting GraphQL versions inside of node modules we'll also force Gatsby to use the same version as TinaCMS in package.json.

Add the following:

```diff
{
  //...
+  "resolutions": {
+    "graphql": "^15.8.0",
+    "**/graphql": "^15.8.0"
+ }
}
```

## Configuring our Schema

> Now we've added Tina to our project but it's not pointing at our existing markdown files. Let's fix that.
> 
> Open up `tina/config.ts` and change the path to point to our blog directory. We'll also need to update our schema since we'll work with mdx files.
> 
> Next we'll need to change the location where images get uploaded. Since `public` doesn't get tracked in Git.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that Tina is added to our project, we need to link it to our existing markdown files.

1. Open `tina/config.ts` and update the path to point to the blog directory.
2. Update the schema to work with `.mdx` files to ensure proper handling of markdown with JSX support.
3. Modify the image upload location, as the `public` directory isn’t tracked by Git.
```

-   id: string
-   internal: {
-     contentFilePath: string
-   }
-   fields: {
-     slug: string
-   }
- }
-
- export { AllPageData, PageData }

+ import client from "../tina/__generated__/client"
+ import { Post } from "../tina/__generated__/types"
+
+ type PostResponse = Awaited<ReturnType<typeof client.queries.post>>
+ type AllPostResponse = Awaited<ReturnType<typeof client.queries.postConnection>>
+ type BlogPost = Partial<Post> & {
+   slug: string
+   relativePath: string
+ }
+
+ export { AllPostResponse, BlogPost, PostResponse }
```

And we'll also want to import them at the top of our blog-post page.

Then we'll add a helper to map the response from Tina's GraphQL API to a to a schema similar to the existing page data.

```diff
+ import { AllPostResponse, BlogPost } from "./src/types"

+ const mapResponse = (postResponse: AllPostResponse): BlogPost[] => {
+  const mappedResponse = postResponse.data.postConnection.edges.map(edge => {
+    const {
+      title,
+      body,
+      _sys: { breadcrumbs, relativePath },
+    } = edge.node
+    return {
+      relativePath,
+      title,
+      body,
+      slug: breadcrumbs[0],
+    }
+  })
+  return mappedResponse
+ }

```

> Next we'll update the createPages function to use Tina's GraphQL API to generate the pages and remove the existing call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next we'll update the `createPages` function to use Tina's GraphQL API to generate the pages and remove the existing call.
```

+   const { data, query, variables }: PostResponse = await client.queries.post({
+     relativePath: relativePath,
+   })
+   const nextPageData = await getPostLinkData(nextPostPath)
+   const previousPageData = await getPostLinkData(previousPostPath)
+
+   return {
+     props: {
+       query,
+       data,
+       variables,
+       nextPageData,
+       previousPageData,
+     },
+   }
+ }
```

We'll also update the page query to exclude the markdown from the query since we'll be using TinaCMS to populate the page instead.

```diff
export const pageQuery = graphql`
-  query BlogPostBySlug(
-    $id: String!
-    $previousPostId: String
-    $nextPostId: String
-  ) {
  query {
    site {
      siteMetadata {
        title
      }
    }
-    mdx(id: { eq: $id }) {
-      id
-      frontmatter {
-        title
-        date(formatString: "MMMM DD, YYYY")
-        description
-      }
-    }
-    previous: mdx(id: { eq: $previousPostId }) {
-      fields {
-        slug
-      }
-      frontmatter {
-        title
-      }
-    }
-    next: mdx(id: { eq: $nextPostId }) {
-      fields {
-        slug
-      }
      frontmatter {
        title
      }
    }
  }
`
```

> Now that we've configured our page with a new data source we can use th useTina hook to implement visual editing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we've configured our page with a new data source we can use the `useTina` hook to implement visual editing.
```

> first update the page props for `BlogPostTemplate`. We'll add in our server fetched data and pull that in using the useTina hook

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First update the page props for `BlogPostTemplate`. We'll add in our server fetched data and pull that in using the `useTina` hook
```

```diff

+ import { useTina } from 'tinacms/dist/react'
//...

- const BlogPostTemplate = ({
- data: { previous, next, site, mdx: post },
-  location,
-  children,
-}) => {
+ const BlogPostTemplate = ({
+   serverData,
+  data: { site },
+  location
+  }) => {

+ const { query, variables, nextPageData, previousPageData } = serverData
+ const { data: tinaData } = useTina({
+   data: serverData.data,
+   query,
+   variables,
+ })
//...
```

> Then we'll swap out all of the existing data with the data we get back from Tina. Note the additon of the tinaField property, which is used to add contextual editing for each of the fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we'll swap out all of the existing data with the data we get back from Tina. Note the addition of the `tinaField` property, which is used to add contextual editing for each of the fields.
```

+  <p data-tina-field={tinaField(tinaData.post, 'date')}>{tinaData.date}</p>
</header>
- {children}
+ <main data-tina-field={tinaField(tinaData.post, "body")}>
+   <TinaMarkdown content={tinaData.post.body} />
+ </main>
<hr />
<footer>
  <Bio />
</footer>
</article>
<nav className="blog-post-nav">
<ul
  style={{
    display: `flex`,
    flexWrap: `wrap`,
    justifyContent: `space-between`,
    listStyle: `none`,
    padding: 0,}}>
  <li>
-  {previous && (
-    <Link to={previous.fields.slug} rel="prev">
-      ← {previous.frontmatter.title}
+  {previousPageData && (
+    <Link to={previousPageData.slug} rel="prev">
+      ← {previousPageData.title}
        </Link>
      )}
    </li>
    <li>

- {next && (
-   <Link to={next.fields.slug} rel="next">
-                {next.frontmatter.title} →
+ {nextPageData && (
+   <Link to={nextPageData.slug} rel="next">
+               {nextPageData.title} →
```

There's one other step we'll do. Unfortunately, our date isn't being formatted using by the graphql query. To fix this we'll use a library to format our date.

```bash
yarn add dateformat
```

> Then we'll add a useEffect statement to update the date when it date changes. We're using useEffect here so that the date will be recomputed when we use the visual editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we'll add a `useEffect` to update the date when the date changes. We're using `useEffect` here so that the date will be recomputed when we use the visual editor.
```

> using `useState` will cause the date to update when our data source changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `useState` will cause the date to update when our data source changes.
```

const BlogPostTemplate = ({ serverData, data: { site }, location }) => {
  const { query, variables, nextPageData, previousPageData } = serverData
  const { data: tinaData } = useTina({
    data: serverData.data,
    query,
    variables,
  })
  const siteTitle = site.siteMetadata?.title || `Title`
+  const [formattedDate, setFormattedDate] = React.useState(
+    dateFormat(tinaData.post.date, "mmmm dd, yyyy")
+  )
+  React.useEffect(() => {
+    setFormattedDate(dateFormat(tinaData.post.date, "mmmm dd, yyyy"))
+  }, [tinaData.post.date])
  return (
    <Layout location={location} title={siteTitle}>
      <article
        className="blog-post"
        itemScope
        itemType="http://schema.org/Article"
      >
        <header>
         <h1 data-tina-field={tinaField(tinaData.post, "title")} itemProp="headline">{tinaData.post.title}</h1>
-          <p data-tina-field={tinaField(tinaData.post, "date")}>{post.frontmatter.date}</p>
+          <p data-tina-field={tinaField(tinaData.post, "date")}>{formattedDate}</p>

//...

```

![editing an article's date using the visual editor](</live preview date changes.gif> "Article date updating in real time")

#### Updating the home page

> We also need to update the pages on the home page because it was being populated using gatsby-mdx before. Add the following changes to `src/pages/index.tsx`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also need to update the homepage to reflect content changes, as it was previously populated using `gatsby-mdx`. Make the following updates to `src/pages/index.tsx`:
```

```diff
export const pageQuery = graphql`
  query {
    site {
      siteMetadata {
        title
      }
    }
  }
- allMdx(sort: { frontmatter: { date: DESC } }) {
-       nodes {
-         fields {
-           slug
-         }
-         frontmatter {
-           date(formatString: "MMMM DD, YYYY")
-            title
-            description
-          }
-        }
-      }
   }
`
}
```

> On the home page we'll need to add a server side fetch to get the full list of articles using TinaCMS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the homepage, we’ll need to implement a server-side fetch to retrieve the full list of articles through TinaCMS.
```

+            <li key={post.slug}>
              <article
                className="post-list-item"
                itemScope
                itemType="http://schema.org/Article"
              >
                <header>
                  <h2>
-                    <Link to={post.fields.slug} itemProp="url">
+                    <Link to={post.slug} itemProp="url">
                      <span itemProp="headline">{title}</span>
                    </Link>
                  </h2>
-                  <small>{post.frontmatter.date}</small>
+                  <small>{post.date}</small>
                </header>
                <section>
                  <p
                    dangerouslySetInnerHTML={{
-                      __html: post.frontmatter.description,
+                      __html: post.description,
                    }}
                    itemProp="description"/>
//...
```

```diff
- export const Head = ({ data: { mdx: post } }) => {
+ export const Head = ({ serverData }) => {
  return (
    <Seo
-      title={post.title}
+      title={serverData.data.post.title}
-      description={post.description}
+      description={serverData.data.description}
    />
  )
}
```

> > Note: we don't need to use the useTina hook here because the home page is static.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: we don't need to use the `useTina` hook here because the homepage is static.
```

> We'll also format the date in this file. Note that we don't need to use useEffect here because the page is static.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll also format the date in this file. Note that we don't need to use `useEffect` here because the page is static.
```

```diff
//...
<ol style={{ listStyle: `none` }}>
  {posts.map(post => {
+    const formattedDate = formatDate(post.date, "mmmm mm, yyyy")
    const title = post.title || post.slug

    return (
      <li key={post.slug}>
        <article
          className="post-list-item"
          itemScope
          itemType="http://schema.org/Article"
        >
          <header>
            <h2>
              <Link to={post.slug} itemProp="url">
                <span itemProp="headline">{title}</span>
              </Link>
            </h2>
-            <small>{post.date}</small>
+            <small>{formattedDate}</small>
          </header>
          <section>
            <p
              dangerouslySetInnerHTML={{
                __html: post.description,
              }}
              itemProp="description"
//...
```

> The final thing we'll need to do to add contextual editing is to configure the routing property of our collection. This will navigate us to the correct page
> when we open the file in TinaCMS' visual editor. Because we're storing each blog post in a single folder in `content` we can just use the first
> folder in the breadcrumbs array to retrieve the correct path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final step for enabling contextual editing is to configure the `routing` property of our collection. This setting will ensure that we navigate to the correct page when opening a file in TinaCMS's visual editor. Since each blog post is stored in its own folder within the `content` directory, we can use the first folder in the breadcrumbs array to determine the correct path.
```

I think this would be better if we used the `.filename` prop instead of breadcrumbs here.

```diff
  schema: {
    collections: [
      {
+        ui: {
+          router: ({ document }) => {

> +            return document._sys.breadcrumbs[0]

Reviewer: I think this would be better if we used the `.filename` prop instead of breadcrumbs here.

Author: the name of the files are "index.mdx" in this case, so I don't think this would work

Reviewer: ahhh ok! this will be fine as long as content isn't nested inside a folder.

+          },
+        },
```

## (Optional) Adding React components

> You can create React components in Gatsby as well. First, we'll modify the schema for our blog posts, defining the new React component we're planning to add.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also add custom React components in Gatsby. First, update the schema for your blog posts to define the new React component you plan to add.
```

Because we'll be using Tina's graphql client for this approach we no longer need to skip it.
In fact we'll need it to retrieve the GraphQL queries required for visual editing.

```diff
export default defineConfig({
-  client: { skip: true },
// ...
```

#### Generating the pages

First, we'll new types for the response from Tina's GraphQL API and remove the existing ones.
Modify the types in `src/types.ts` to reflect the new data we'll be getting back from Tina's API.

```diff
- type PageData = {
-   id: string
-   internal: {
-     contentFilePath: string
-   }
-   fields: {
-     slug: string
-   }
- }
-
- export { AllPageData, PageData }

+ import client from "../tina/__generated__/client"
+ import { Post } from "../tina/__generated__/types"
+
+ type PostResponse = Awaited<ReturnType<typeof client.queries.post>>
+ type AllPostResponse = Awaited<ReturnType<typeof client.queries.postConnection>>
+ type BlogPost = Partial<Post> & {
+   slug: string
+   relativePath: string
+ }
+
+ export { AllPostResponse, BlogPost, PostResponse }
```

And we'll also want to import them at the top of our blog-post page.

> Then we'll add a helper to map the response from Tina's GraphQL API to a to a schema similar to the existing page data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we'll add a helper to map the response from Tina's GraphQL API to a schema similar to the existing page data.
```

            isTitle: true,
            required: true,
          },
          {
            type: "datetime",
            name: "date",
            label: "Date",
          },
          {
            type: "rich-text",
            name: "body",
            label: "Body",
            isBody: true,
+           templates: [
+           {
+             name: "RichBlockQuote",
+             label: "Rich Block Quote",
+             fields: [
+               {
+                 name: "children",
+                 label: "Body",
+                 type: "rich-text",
+               },
+             ],
+           },
+         ],
          },
        ],
      },
    ],
  },
```

> Next, we'll define how the custom component will look in `blog-post.tsx`. We'll be parsing the child of the component into our TinaMarkdown renderer to give us rich text editing capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we'll define how the custom component will look in `blog-post.tsx`. We'll be parsing the child of the component into our `TinaMarkdown` renderer to give us rich text editing capabilities.
```
